Branches (#15)
Akuli/git-guide: branches.md

# Branches

Suppose you are working on a calculator program.
You start working on a new multiplication feature,
and you have already [committed and pushed](committing.md) several times.

> Your multiplication work is far from done, and the code is still WIP;

Author: ```suggestion
The code is still WIP (Work In Progress, far from done);
```

        calculator.py

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)

$ git add calculator.py

$ git status
On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.

Changes to be committed:
  (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
        new file:   calculator.py

$ git commit -m "create calculator.py"
[main 78b197b] create calculator.py
 1 file changed, 10 insertions(+)
 create mode 100644 calculator.py

$ git status
On branch main
Your branch is ahead of 'origin/main' by 1 commit.
  (use "git push" to publish your local commits)

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

## Branch basics

When I work with branches, I constantly use the following command to check what's going on,
similarly to `git status`:

```diff
$ git log --oneline --graph --all
* 78b197b (HEAD -> main) create calculator.py
* 5bf1f4e (origin/main, origin/HEAD) add better description to README
* 1f95680 Initial commit
```

We already saw `--oneline` [last time](committing.md#looking-at-previous-commits).
I will explain `--graph` and `--all` soon.

By default, there is only one branch. In new GitHub repos, it's called `main`.

> Earlier GitHub's name for the default branch was `master`,

Author: ```suggestion
GitHub's name for the default branch used to be `master`,
```

and many projects still have a branch named `master` instead of a `main` branch.

Seeing `main` next to `78b197b` means that `78b197b` is the latest commit on `main`.
Here `origin` means GitHub and `origin/main` is GitHub's main branch,
so `5bf1f4e` next to it means that the latest commit we pushed is `5bf1f4e`.

There is also a notion of **current branch**, which is often called `HEAD`.
Above we see `(HEAD -> main)`, which means that now the current branch is `main`.

Let's make a new branch:

```diff
$ git checkout -b multiplication
Switched to a new branch 'multiplication'

$ git status
On branch multiplication
nothing to commit, working tree clean

$ git log --oneline --graph --all
* 78b197b (HEAD -> multiplication, main) create calculator.py
* 5bf1f4e (origin/main, origin/HEAD) add better description to README
* 1f95680 Initial commit
```

Here `multiplication` is a branch name; you can name a branch however you want.
The latest commit on the `multiplication` branch is `78b197b`, same as on `main`.

In the output of the last command,

> `HEAD -> multiplication` means that we are now on the `multiplication branch`,

Author: ```suggestion
`HEAD -> multiplication` means that we are now on the `multiplication` branch,
```

and having `main` next to it means that

> `78b197b` is the latest commit on the `multiplication` branch and the `main` branch.

Author: This is a bit repetitive. Similar explanation was earlier.

We can go back to the `main` branch with `git checkout`, but without `-b`;
the `-b` means that a new branch is created.

```diff
$ git checkout main
Switched to branch 'main'
Your branch is ahead of 'origin/main' by 1 commit.
  (use "git push" to publish your local commits)

$ git status
On branch main
Your branch is ahead of 'origin/main' by 1 commit.
  (use "git push" to publish your local commits)

nothing to commit, working tree clean

$ git log --oneline --graph --all
* 78b197b (HEAD -> main, multiplication) create calculator.py
* 5bf1f4e (origin/main, origin/HEAD) add better description to README
* 1f95680 Initial commit

$ git checkout multiplication
Switched to branch 'multiplication'

$ git status
On branch multiplication
nothing to commit, working tree clean

$ git log --oneline --graph --all
* 78b197b (HEAD -> multiplication, main) create calculator.py
* 5bf1f4e (origin/main, origin/HEAD) add better description to README
* 1f95680 Initial commit
```

On the `multiplication` branch, let's create the multiplication code:

```python
# Add to end of calculator.py (on branch multiplication)
elif operation == "*":
    print(first_number * second_unmber)
```

> The new multiplication code is buggy, but let's try it and commit the result.

Author: ```suggestion
The new multiplication code is buggy, but let's try it and commit it anyway.
```

We need to quote `*` because it is a special character on the terminal;
it is good to know how that works, but I won't explain it here because I want to focus on git.

```diff
$ python3 calculator.py 2 "*" 3
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "calculator.py", line 12, in <module>
    print(first_number * second_unmber)
NameError: name 'second_unmber' is not defined

$ git add calculator.py

$ git diff --cached
diff --git a/calculator.py b/calculator.py
index 94265fe..9900601 100644
--- a/calculator.py
+++ b/calculator.py
@@ -8,3 +8,5 @@ if operation == "+":
     print(first_number + second_number)
 elif operation == "-":
     print(first_number + second_number)
+elif operation == "*":
+    print(first_number * second_unmber)

$ git commit -m "multiplication code, not working yet"
[multiplication 9900601] multiplication code, not working yet
 1 file changed, 2 insertions(+)

$ git log --oneline --graph --all
* 9900601 (HEAD -> multiplication) multiplication code, not working yet
* 78b197b (main) create calculator.py
* 5bf1f4e (origin/main, origin/HEAD) add better description to README
* 1f95680 Initial commit
```

> Notice how the `main` branch was left behind when we committed;

Author: ```suggestion
Note how the `main` branch was left behind when we committed;
```

> our latest commit is only on the `multiplication` branch, because we did `git checkout multiplication`.

Author: ```suggestion
our latest commit is only on the `multiplication` branch, because we did `git checkout multiplication` before committing.
```

```diff
$ git push --set-upstream origin multiplication
Username for 'https://github.com': username
Password for 'https://username@github.com':
Enumerating objects: 12, done.
Counting objects: 100% (12/12), done.
Delta compression using up to 2 threads
Compressing objects: 100% (8/8), done.
Writing objects: 100% (8/8), 5.76 KiB | 5.76 MiB/s, done.
Total 8 (delta 5), reused 0 (delta 0)
remote: Resolving deltas: 100% (5/5), completed with 4 local objects.
remote:
remote: Create a pull request for 'multiplication' on GitHub by visiting:
remote:      https://github.com/username/reponame/pull/new/multiplication
remote:
To https://github.com/username/reponame
 * [new branch]      multiplication -> multiplication
Branch 'multiplication' set up to track remote branch 'multiplication' from 'origin'.
```

Now Git will remember that you already ran the command it suggested,
and `git push` without anything else after it will work next time.
This is branch-specific though, so you need to do the `--set-upstream` thing once for each branch.

In GitHub, there should be a menu where you can choose a branch and it says `main` by default.

> You should now see `multiplication` branch in that menu,

Author: ```suggestion
You should now see a `multiplication` branch in that menu,
```

> and if you click it and then open `calculator.py` in GitHub, you should see the multiplication code.

Author: ```suggestion
and if you click it and then open `calculator.py`, you should see the multiplication code.
```

    first_number = int(sys.argv[1])
    operation = sys.argv[2]
    second_number = int(sys.argv[3])

    if operation == "+":
        print(first_number + second_number)
    elif operation == "-":
    <<<<<<< HEAD
        print(first_number - second_number)
    =======
        print(first_number + second_number)
    elif operation == "*":
        print(first_number * second_number)
    >>>>>>> multiplication

The code on main (current branch, aka `HEAD`) is between `<<<<<<<` and `=======`.
That's the correct subtraction code.
The code on `multiplication` branch is between `=======` and `>>>>>>>`.
Now you have to combine it all together:
you need to include the `*` code and make sure that the subtraction code actually subtracts.
Like this:

```python
# Edit calculator.py so that it looks like this
import sys

first_number = int(sys.argv[1])
operation = sys.argv[2]
second_number = int(sys.argv[3])

if operation == "+":
    print(first_number + second_number)
elif operation == "-":
    print(first_number - second_number)
elif operation == "*":
    print(first_number * second_number)
```

Let's check whether we combined it correctly:

```diff
$ python3 calculator.py 1 - 2

> -1

Author: This highlights as red
